[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>"Eastern Wisdom and Modern
Life," with Alan W. Watts.
Produced by KQED San Francisco,
for the Educational Television
and Radio Center.
Alan Watts is a
scholar, lecturer,
and the author of
many widely-read books
on comparative
philosophy and religion.
>>It was as a result of
looking at paintings like this
that I first became interested
in eastern philosophy.
That was many years ago,
when I was a boy only
about 14 years old.
And the thing that
grasped me and excited me
about this vision of the world
was the astonishing sympathy
and feeling for the
world of nature.
Think, for example,
of a painting
like this, which is called
"Mountain After Rain,"
a painting by the Chinese
artist Gao Kegong,
showing the mist and
clouds drifting away
after a wet night
of pouring rain.
And it's fascinating
for us to think
that pictures of this kind are
not what we would call just
landscape paintings.
They are also icons.
That is to say, they are a
religious and philosophical
kind of painting.
We are used, of
course, in thinking
about of iconographic or
religious paintings of thinking
of pictures of human
figures, of angels
and saints and divine beings.
But when the mind of
the Chinese expresses
its religious feeling,
it expresses it
in the objects of nature.
And their feeling for nature is
in one very important respect
strangely different from ours.
And that is as a
result of the sensation
that the human
being is not someone
who stands apart
from nature and looks
at it from an entirely
outside position,
but the human being
has himself the feeling
of belonging right in nature.
And this is very
startlingly illustrated
if you look at another panting--
this one by the great Song
Dynasty painter, Ma Yuan--
called "Poet Drinking
by Moonlight."
You would think it was just a
landscape painting and puzzle,
find the poet.
But if you look very
closely in the bottom part
of the painting, you
will see him right there,
drinking a cup of wine, sitting
at a table, with his boy
attendant beside him.
I suppose that's the
equivalent of what
would be a graduate
student for a professor
of English literature
in these days.
But that tiny man,
lost in the landscape,
is representative and
symbolic of the whole attitude
of the Chinese mind and
of Chinese philosophy.
To the harmony of
man and nature-- man
not dominating nature,
but fitting into it,
and feeding perfectly at home.
But you know, our attitude
is very strangely different.
And we constantly
use a phrase-- which,
in the ears of Chinese people,
sounds very peculiar indeed.
We speak constantly of
the conquest of nature,
the conquest of
space, the conquest
of mountains like Everest.
And they would say to us, well,
what's the matter with you?
Why must you be in such
a fight all the time
with your environment?
Aren't you grateful to the
mountain that it itself lifted
you up when you got
to the top of it?
Aren't you grateful to space
that it opens itself out
for you so that you
can travel through it?
Why do you think all the time
of getting into a fight with it?
But that is indeed, isn't
it, our dominant feeling--
that we are using science
and technology, the powers
of electricity and
steel, to carry
on a fight with
our external world
and beat our surroundings into
submissions with bulldozers.
And it's also the same with
our attitude to our own nature,
because we've been brought
up in a religio-philosophical
tradition which has taught
us, to a great extent,
to mistrust ourselves.
That is to say, it has taught
us, as reasoning and willing
beings, to mistrust our
animal and instinctual nature.
We have inherited a doctrine
of original sin, which
tells us not to be
too friendly, to be
very cautious with
our own human nature.
And this is something
which is all very well,
for we have indeed
achieved marvelous things
by technological interference
with and alteration of nature.
But if this thing is carried
beyond a certain point,
it gets us into
very serious trouble
indeed, as a result
of what I would
call the law of
diminishing returns.
Now, it's something like
this, to illustrate it
in a very simple way.
Supposing you start
mistrusting your own senses,
supposing you're
the sort of person
who, when you go out for
a walk in the morning,
you're going down the market.
And you wonder, did I
turn off the gas stove?
And you've only gone a
few paces from your house,
and you think you must go back
and take a look at the kitchen
and see if you really
did turn it off.
So back you go, and
you open the back door
and look in the kitchen.
Yes, you did turn it off.
So you close the back
door, and off you go again.
And then, a few
places out, you think,
I wonder if I really
saw correctly.
Did I look carefully enough?
And at that point you break
down and go back again.
The more careful
you're going to be,
you're never going
to get out shopping.
You're going to
be tied in a bind.
And although you may
say, well, that's only
the sort of thing a very
stupid person indeed
would do, as a
matter of fact, this
is what our culture is
beginning to carry on
in very big dimensions.
For example, we are privileged
in the United States
to enjoy freedom in a way that
many other people in the world
don't have it.
Yet at the same time, we
are very anxious to be sure
that our freedom
won't be abused.
And we keep saying when
somebody does something
that is an abuse
of freedom, there
ought to be a law against it.
And so hundreds and
thousands of laws
are put into effect
to prevent people
from abusing their freedom.
And so much legislation involves
the most complicated processes
of record keeping-- as, for
example, the records you have
to send in every
April to be sure
you didn't cheat on
your financial affairs.
Records, which have become more
and more and more complicated
so that nowadays sending in an
ordinary individual income tax
return is said to be as
complicated as extracting
the cube root of a
complicated number.
And the net result
of our anxiety
to write down just exactly
and to the last hair
so that some shyster lawyer
won't find a loophole, exactly
and to the last hair what
we may and may not do.
The net result of this is it's
becoming increasingly difficult
to do anything at all.
In other words, if you want to
start a business enterprise,
if you want to create,
say, a nonprofit society,
you have to hire lawyers.
You have to have whole
staffs of secretaries
to attend to the
bookkeeping, the records,
the returns that must be
made to the government.
And some of our
great universities
even have vice
presidents in charge
of relations with
the government.
The same thing comes
out, for example also,
in our animosity to nature
in the sense of wanting
to obliterate dissonance.
We want to go faster
and faster everywhere
we go, and so
annihilate the span
of the Earth between ourselves
and the place we want to reach.
But what is the
ultimate result of this?
Just think of it.
If you're getting faster and
faster from point to point
and obliterating the
distance between points,
two things happen.
In the first place,
all points that
are set next to each other--
by, say, jet propulsion--
tend to become the same point.
In other words, the faster
you can get from Los Angeles
to Hawaii, the more
Hawaii becomes exactly
like Los Angeles.
And therefore tourists
keep asking, well,
has it been spoiled yet?
And by that they mean, is
it just exactly like home?
And furthermore, if we begin
to think about our goals
in life, as destinations, as
points to which we must get,
it begins to cut out all that
makes the point worth having.
It's like saying, well, instead
of giving you a full banana
to eat, I will give you the
two precise ends of the banana.
And that would not be, in any
sense, a satisfactory meal.
That is what happens as we
tend to fight our environment,
and to want to get rid of the
wonderful limitation of space
and distance.
And you know, if we
carry this kind of thing
to its ultimate extreme, we
get into a most extraordinary
tangle, which I think I
could very well illustrate
in this way.
Let's go and have
a look over here
at a sentence which has
been written on the board.
That is a sentence
which is behaving
like we are behaving in
our mistrust of nature.
That is a sentence which
fundamentally does not
trust itself.
And it says of itself,
"This statement is false."
Now, what do you see
funny about that?
This sentence behaves in
an extremely peculiar way.
Because if it is true,
then it is not true.
And if it's not
true, then that's
what it says, that it
isn't true so it's true.
So that if this statement
is true, it is false.
And if it is false, it is
true, and so on and so on.
In other words, the meaning of
the sentence is oscillating.
It's shaking from true
to false, true to false,
like an electric bell vibrating.
And in other words,
you might say
that this particular sentence
is suffering from anxiety.
Or anxiety is the condition
that comes upon us when
we fundamentally
mistrust ourselves,
when we mistrust our own
nature, and are trying
to keep such a tight grip on
it that we start to tremble--
as one's hand starts to
tremble if you become extremely
anxious to hold it still.
Now, Chinese thinking,
of which there are really
two main currents-- the Taoist
current and the Confucian.
Taoist, that's spelled
T-A-O-I-S-T, and Confucian.
And both of these main
currents of Chinese thought
agree on one
fundamental principle.
And that is that
the natural world
in which we live and
human nature itself
must basically be trusted.
They would say of a person who
can't trust his own nature,
well, if you can't trust
your own nature, how can you
trust your very
mistrusting of it?
How do you know that
that's not wrong too?
And so if you don't
trust your own nature,
you are as fundamentally
balled up as anyone can get.
Now, it's interesting to look
at the fundamental Chinese word,
which we translate as "nature"
because it has a rather
different meaning from
the word that we use.
In Chinese, "nature"
is written like this.
You know that Chinese characters
are fundamentally pictures.
And this first one is the
picture that used to be a face.
And so it means
oneself, or of itself.
And the second
character, I don't
know what this was originally.
It's become now a
very abstract figure.
That means soul.
And so the whole figure
means of itself soul.
And we should give the
rough English equivalent
of that as spontaneity-- that
which happens of itself, just
in the same way, for
example, that your hair is
growing by itself.
Your heart is beating by itself,
so that if you feel your pulse,
you get this funny
sensation of movement
going on inside your
body, and you think, oh,
I'm not doing that.
That's something queer
going on inside me,
over which I have no control.
But when you come to think of
it, what is more fundamental,
what is more
central to you, what
is more the very middle of
yourself than your own heart?
And so this idea of nature, that
which happens of itself soul,
is a process which
is fundamentally not
under our control, which
is happening all on its own
just as our breathing is
happening all on its own,
and just as our heart beating
is happening all on its own.
And the fundamental thought
of Taoist philosophy
is that this self-soul
process has to be trusted.
If you turn now to
Confucian ideas,
we will find another
word that represents
the basis of human nature.
This word, written like this,
has a funny pronunciation.
Although when we romanize
this word in English,
we spell it J-E-N.
It's pronounced
"ryun," sort of like rolling
an R-- or rather, saying R,
but not rolling it.
And this word is
the cardinal virtue
in the whole system
of Confucian morality.
It's usually translated "human
heartedness," or "humanness."
But when Confucius
was asked to give
a precise definition
of it, he refused.
He said, you have to feel
the meaning of this virtue.
You must never
put it into words.
And the wisdom of his attitude
about not defining jen
is simply this--
that a human being is
always greater than anything
he can say about himself,
and anything he can
think about himself.
If we formulate ideas
about our own nature,
about how our own minds
and emotions work,
those ideas are always
going to be quantitatively
inferior-- that is to say,
far less complicated, far less
alive, than the actual author
of the ideas themselves.
And that is us.
So there's something
about ourselves
which we can never get at,
which we can never define,
in just the same way that you
can't bite your own teeth.
You can't, without
to aid of a mirror,
look into your own eyes.
You can't hear your own ears.
And you can't make your own
hand catch hold of itself.
So that you must,
basically, trust this.
Confucius would say he would
rather trust human passions
and instincts than
he would sometimes
trust human ideas
about what is right.
For example, when
people go to war,
they very often go to war about
who has the right ideology, who
has the right of this
particular dispute,
and who has the wrong of it?
And because there can be
no agreement, no compromise
between principles
of right and wrong,
ideological wars generally
tend to be vastly destructive.
On the other hand, when we go to
war for simple, ordinary greed,
because I'm greedy of another
people, of another nation,
I want to carry off their goods.
I want to carry off their women.
I will at least be sure,
in going to war with them,
that I don't destroy the
thing I want to possess.
And so if we are then bound
to trust our own nature,
this attitude of hands off, of
not interfering with oneself
beyond a certain point,
is called-- again,
in Laozi's Taoist
philosophy, this-- "wu wei."
This character means
no, not, or don't.
And it's said to have
been originally based
on a picture of bunches
of grass tied together,
like this, indicating that
a certain area is taboo.
You mustn't step on this
area, the ground is sacred.
So "don't," "keep
off" is its meaning.
And it's possible that
this was originally
a drawing of a hand
over a bird, like this.
So the meaning of this
is grasping a bird.
The whole idea is,
don't grasp the bird.
In other words, don't
clutch at what is living.
If, for instance,
you like sometimes
little children
pick up a kitten.
And they're so eager
to hold the kitten,
they squeeze it tightly.
And the kitty says, meow,
meow, and scratches the child
all over the place.
It's because he is loving it.
He is grasping it too tightly.
And so in the same way, we
have to allow all living things
to let go and manage themselves.
Look, supposing
if, in drawing, I
wanted to be absolutely certain
that my hand didn't go away
from a line.
And oh, I began to get anxious.
Is it going to go straight?
And so let's bring in
this hand to hold onto it.
Oh, let's send
this one straight.
But now how can I be
sure my left hand's
going to stay still?
Maybe the right one will
have to catch hold of it.
And then we're in a total mess.
But you see, we in
the West are basically
afraid that if we
trust our own nature,
everything will turn into chaos.
We're afraid, as it
were, not to keep
holding a club over
our heads, to keep
watching on our instincts
and our passions
and our so-called
uncivilized animal
natures, fearing that
they will go awry.
But you know, when you let
go of that grip on yourself,
sometimes astounding
things happen.
You get out of your own light.
You're functioning all
together in one piece.
I mean, after all, a
person who is basically
divided against himself,
who is in inner conflict
and is trying to go in
two directions at once?
He can't go anywhere.
He'd just have to
sit and dither.
Whereas if I'm going all in
one direction, then at least
I'm going.
And even if I'm going
in the wrong way,
I can change the direction.
But if I'm trying to
go two ways at once,
I don't get anywhere at all.
Now, artists in
the Far East have
made a great deal of what they
call the controlled accident--
marvelous things which happen
as surprises when an office does
not try to dominate his medium,
but let his medium itself
do some of the work.
Take, for example, this
cigarette jar that I have here.
You see the glaze has
just been slopped on it,
with a swift motion
of the wrist.
And do you notice, as
I turn it, that there
are all sorts of
little flecks of white
inside the black outline
now, and little flecks
of black, like right here,
outside the main band of black?
It's incidental things
like this which,
to the Chinese and
Japanese mind--
and increasingly to our
own way of thinking--
make the real beauty of things.
For instance, consider
a shell like this.
Here is an object
which any one of you
would pick up on the
beach if you saw it.
And yet, what does it represent?
If you saw painting with
markings on like that,
you might say, well, that's
not what I call a painting.
It doesn't look like anything.
And yet, as I say,
none of you would
hesitate to pick that up and
treasure it if you found it.
For it too, like the jar, is
a sort of controlled accident.
And it is the art of
trusting the medium
to express itself along with
your own contribution to it
as an artist.
When this harmonious
relationship of man/nature
is brought into play, we
get marvelous little objects
of this kind.
And so in the same
way, if we can
learn to trust our own
nature, we will, I think,
be profoundly surprised that
things don't go out of control
at all, but on the
contrary, suddenly
come back into control.
Take, for example, a
very familiar instance.
Supposing you're learning to
ride a bicycle, some of you
will have known that
when you started out
this rather difficult
art, you found yourself
immediately falling over.
And your first instinct
was to turn the wheel right
opposite the direction in
which you were falling.
And in this way, you collapse
totally on the ground.
It seemed to be common
sense to turn away
from the direction in
which you were falling.
And yet, the thing you
have to learn to do
is to turn the wheel in
the direction in which you
are falling.
And in this way,
you-- zip-- suddenly
come up straight again,
and you're in control.
You expected to fall.
You went with the fall.
And you came to yourself again.
In precisely the
same way, when we
go with our own nature,
our own inner feelings,
we come into control of them.
We don't lose control.
If we fight them, we get in
that state of balled up-ness,
of anxiety, of
dither, which makes
us incapable of doing
anything at all.
And anxiety and dither which is
comparable to the whole problem
of maintaining freedom in a
world like ours, a problem
that we are in danger of losing
our freedom through being
overanxious to preserve it.
Or think of another
illustration,
those of you who live in
the East and the Middle West
are familiar, every winter,
with the problems of icy roads.
But any good driver knows that
when you skid on an icy road,
you have to turn in the
direction of your skid,
and not against your skid.
That again brings
you into control.
To fight the trend of things,
to fight what the Chinese call
the Tao, the T-A-O,
the way of nature,
is to come into
conflict with nature
so that you can't
do anything at all.
Or another common
example, everybody
who ever used a
sailing boat knows
that if you are
going to move, you've
got to keep the
wind in your sails.
Even if you want to
go against the wind,
you would never dream of
turning the boat directly
into the path of the wind.
So you always have in some way
to keep the wind behind you,
but when you want to
go against the wind,
you don't fight the wind.
You use the wind.
You, in other words, tack
against it at an angle,
so that it blows
you into itself.
And this is the fundamental
principle of Chinese
philosophy, which underlies that
starting manifestation of it
in Japanese wrestling--
called "judo"--
where you overcome the
enemy not by opposing him,
but by using his own strength
to bring about his downfall.
For this is the philosophy
of bend and survive,
of the strength of weakness,
as the willow trees under snow
go supple and drop the snow.
But the pine, with
its tough branch,
piles up the snow and cracks.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This is National
Educational Television.